FOCUS #152: Commitment Utilization (#180)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/dimensions/usagetype.md

> # Usage Type

Reviewer: Strongly oppose this being called UsageType. Pricing model makes sense other than the fact that we have put a sub-property of 'unused commitment' as a first-level value for this column IMO. 

I would use a value like 'Committed' or 'Committed Usage' and then have a separate property to say its used vs unused. If we're against creating an explicit column, maybe this can be figured out based on the fact that the resource id is a commitment OR the resource type for the line is a commitment discount (as opposed to some other actual resource you would use - e.g. lambda, vm, etc.) to know that the purchased discount didn't apply to actual resources.

> # Usage Type

Reviewer 2: I would propose ChargeSubType:
- The 'Sub' pattern already exists with SubAccountId/Name
- The ChargeSubType dimension can be used to subcategorize other types of charges
- If find the pattern ChargeType/ChargeSubType simple to handle in visual reporting (for example PowerBI) for both filtering and presentation. For example, I love the columns the MeterCategory and MeterSubCategory in Azure billing data for this.

I would propose the same pattern for Service: ServiceName, SubServiceName.

> # Usage Type

Reviewer 3: FYI - After some discussion, we decided to split this column into 2: `PricingModel` and `CommitmentUtilization` (name TBD), where this column will cover `Used` and `Not Used` capacity, spend, and usage commitments.

> # Usage Type

Reviewer 2: There might be a risk on dispatching the information over different columns for both user understanding and data filtering & presentation. I do not know the rationale of the split, but I actually miss the holistic view / while picture on how charges and commitments are organized / structured.

> UsageType is a categorization parameter that defines how a resource or service was consumed during a specified period. The UsageType can influence the price point and also indicate whether purchased commitments are used or unused. This classification offers a nuanced view into the resource or service's consumption patterns and helps in understanding how you're billed, especially when considered alongside attributes like ChargeType and PurchaseType.

Reviewer 2: > defines how a resource or service was consumed 
In case of unused commitment, there is no resource or service attached to this record (unless one considers the commitment is a resource, which is arguable), so referring a resource or service can be misleading. Maybe using the plural form works better: "defines how resources or services were used".

> during a specific period
Maybe "during the charge period" is more precise

> especially when considered alongside attributes like ChargeType and PurchaseType.
I understood that UsageType would be used to drilldown the type of the record in the case ChargeType=Usage. So UsageType would be populated (not empty, not null) if and only if ChargeType=Usage. In the same way, PurchaseType would be populated if and only if ChargeType=Purchase. Or would ChargeType, UsageType and PurchaseType work in another way?

The UsageType column MUST be present and MUST NOT be null or empty. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the
allowed values.

See [Appendix: Usage Type](#usagetype-1) for details about allowed values and governance criteria for this dimension.

## Column ID

UsageType

## Display Name

Usage Type

## Description

Indicates whether the record pertains to an on-demand or recurring charge, or relates to the cost or capacity using a committed discount rate or from unutilized commitments.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value                                    |
| :-------------- | :--------------------------------------- |
| Column required | True                                     |
| Data type       | String                                   |

> | Allows nulls    | False                                    |

Reviewer 3: Will be null for purchases and adjustments
```suggestion
| Allows nulls    | True                                     |
```

| Value format    | list-of-values                           |

Allowed values:

| Value      | Description                                                                                                                                                                   |
|:-----------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | On-Demand         | This usage type describes the consumption of resources or services that are billed at the standard on-demand unit price.                                                |

Reviewer 2: Maybe OnDemand (without -) is simpler?

How would we deal with Google Sustained Usage Discount?
Would it be another value for UsageType, or a particular case for UsageType=OnDemand. In the latter case, which dimension would bear this information?

Reviewer: +1 on SUDs being volume pricing and not a discount.

Reviewer 4: I'm not so sure about that because it's not really volume. You can consume the same "744 core-hours" of compute by maximizing SUD or not depending on how your organize your workloads.

And Practionners work on how to optimize their SUD  in a similar way as they work on optimizing their commitment discounts :
 - Avoid spikes in instance numbers (if you spread your compute usage, you maximize your SUD)
 - Use consistent instance families (if you use N2 all around instead of "N1 here and N2 there", you maximize your SUD)
 
So i understand the point about considering it a "volume pricing" but there are also aspects which favor considering it as a discount like CUD or RIs.

Reviewer 3: @nfonrose, what value would you want to see for that? It's not a commitment. 

/cc @rodneyjoyce for `PricingModel` 🙂

Reviewer 2: Indeed, SUD could be managed with another dimension, but for simplicity of the FOCUS model, this information could be put in the same dimension. The value could be simply 'Sustained'.

Reviewer 3: Keeping this comment active until the PricingModel PR comes out. Will update everyone here when that's ready.

Reviewer 3: Can everyone please go review the PricingModel PR and leave comments there for anything in this area?
See #214

> | Interruptible     | The interruptible usage type pertains to resources that are provisioned using spot availability. These resources are billed at a fluctuating spot price, which is typically lower than on-demand prices.                                                                                  |

Reviewer 3: Do we want to avoid the word "spot", since it's a product name?

Reviewer 3: I would move this to supporting content.

Reviewer 5: Agreed

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| Interruptible     | Interruptible usage type pertains to consumption of resources provisioned with a cloud provider's ability to stop or interrupt workloads at any time.                                                                       |
```

Reviewer 6: Removed language referring to dynamic pricing, as it's not guaranteed to be true moving forward.

Reviewer 3: Keeping this comment active until the PricingModel PR comes out. Will update here.
/cc @rodneyjoyce for PricingModel

Reviewer 7: Yes, we do not refer to Spot as it is a Vendor term. We use interruptible (not a Proper Noun) in Pricing Model

Reviewer 3: FYI - Here's the PricingModel PR. Please move any comments over there!
See #161

| Committed         | Committed usage refers to the consumption of resources that benefit from a discounted rate due to long-term commitments, such as reserved instances or savings plans. These resources are billed at this reduced rate. |

> | Unused Commitment | This usage type indicates a scenario where a customer has committed to a specific amount or capacity (hourly, daily, etc.) but hasn't fully utilized it. The line item reflects the capacity or monetary value that went unused.                                                                        |

Reviewer 8: Could we not have spaces in the names?

Reviewer: +1 on this being a spec-wide decision. Where it would run into issues is things like Service Category values where without spaces, its not going to be very user friendly.

Reviewer 4: One of the advantages of "no space inside names" is that it makes searching for the terms easiers. And it turn these names into "keywords" rather than usual language, reducing the risk of ambiguities.

So it might be more user-friendly for non tech people to have spaces, but it makes life easier in several cases.

I think hashtags have popularized names with no spaces in the "general population".

Reviewer 3: I'm going to resolve this here and propose that we bring this up outside of this column and discuss it holistically. We can then make a sweeping change to apply whatever we decide.

> | Unused Commitment | This usage type indicates a scenario where a customer has committed to a specific amount or capacity (hourly, daily, etc.) but hasn't fully utilized it. The line item reflects the capacity or monetary value that went unused.                                                                        |

Reviewer 3: @BenShy, can you make sure this is covered in the amortization handling attribute? 

@marc-perreaut, we generally only put the rules for the current column in the column specs. Ben will make sure this is covered in the amortization handling attribute. Do you think we should explicitly add it to the BilledCost column? My only concern would be that spreading the amortization logic in many columns might lead to confusion. Something to consider 🤔

> | Unused Commitment | This usage type indicates a scenario where a customer has committed to a specific amount or capacity (hourly, daily, etc.) but hasn't fully utilized it. The line item reflects the capacity or monetary value that went unused.                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: I am fine with the principle of putting rules only for the current column.
Still I find important that the specification says how commitments are handled overall, ie over different columns and over different rows. It is useful for both FOCUS data producers and consumers.
Maybe there could be a dedicated appendix about commitments?

> | Unused Commitment | This usage type indicates a scenario where a customer has committed to a specific amount or capacity (hourly, daily, etc.) but hasn't fully utilized it. The line item reflects the capacity or monetary value that went unused.                                                                        |

Reviewer 3: FYI - Amortization Handling is here: #229

@marc-perreaut would love your eyes on that to see if we captured this adequately.
